##  4.2 Acceleration Vector 

### Summary

By the end of this section, you will be able to: 

  - Calculate the acceleration vector given the velocity function in unit vector notation.
  - Describe the motion of a particle with a constant acceleration in three dimensions.
  - Use the one-dimensional motion equations along perpendicular axes to solve a problem in two or three dimensions with a constant acceleration.
  - Express the acceleration in unit vector notation.

## 4.2 Acceleration Vector

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to: 

  - Calculate the acceleration vector given the velocity function in unit vector notation.
  - Describe the motion of a particle with a constant acceleration in three dimensions.
  - Use the one-dimensional motion equations along perpendicular axes to solve a problem in two or three dimensions with a constant acceleration.
  - Express the acceleration in unit vector notation.

### Instantaneous Acceleration

In addition to obtaining the displacement and velocity vectors of an object in motion, we often want to know its **acceleration vector** at any point in time along its trajectory. This acceleration vector is the instantaneous acceleration and it can be obtained from the derivative with respect to time of the velocity function, as we have seen in a previous chapter. The only difference in two or three dimensions is that these are now vector quantities. Taking the derivative with respect to time →v(t), we find

→a(t)=limt→0→v(t+Δt)−→v(t)Δt=d→v(t)dt.(4.8) 

The acceleration in terms of components is

→a(t)=​dvx(t)dtˆi+dvy(t)dtˆj+dvz(t)dtˆk.(4.9) 

Also, since the velocity is the derivative of the position function, we can write the acceleration in terms of the second derivative of the position function:

→a(t)=d2x(t)dt2ˆi+d2y(t)dt2ˆj+d2z(t)dt2ˆk.(4.10) 

### Example 4.4 

Finding an Acceleration Vector A particle has a velocity of →v(t)=5.0tˆi+t2ˆj−2.0t3ˆkm/s. (a) What is the acceleration function? (b) What is the acceleration vector at _t_ = 2.0 s? Find its magnitude and direction.

Solution (a) We take the first derivative with respect to time of the velocity function to find the acceleration. The derivative is taken component by component:

→a(t)=5.0ˆi+2.0tˆj−6.0t2ˆkm/s2.

(b) Evaluating →a(2.0s)=5.0ˆi+4.0ˆj−24.0ˆkm/s2 gives us the direction in unit vector notation. The magnitude of the acceleration is |→a(2.0s)|=√5.02+4.02+(−24.0)2=24.8m/s2.

Significance In this example we find that acceleration has a time dependence and is changing throughout the motion. Let’s consider a different velocity function for the particle.

### Example 4.5 

Finding a Particle Acceleration A particle has a position function →r(t)=(10t−t2)ˆi+5tˆj+5t​ˆkm. (a) What is the velocity? (b) What is the acceleration? (c) Describe the motion from _t_ = 0 s.

Strategy We can gain some insight into the problem by looking at the position function. It is linear in _y_ and _z_, so we know the acceleration in these directions is zero when we take the second derivative. Also, note that the position in the _x_ direction is zero for _t_ = 0 s and _t_ = 10 s.

Solution (a) Taking the derivative with respect to time of the position function, we find

→v(t)=(10−2t)ˆi+5ˆj+5ˆkm/s.

The velocity function is linear in time in the _x_ direction and is constant in the _y_ and _z_ directions.

(b) Taking the derivative of the velocity function, we find

→a(t)=−2ˆim/s2.

The acceleration vector is a constant in the negative _x_-direction.

(c) The trajectory of the particle can be seen in Figure 4.9. Let’s look in the _y_ and _z_ directions first. The particle’s position increases steadily as a function of time with a constant velocity in these directions. In the _x_ direction, however, the particle follows a path in positive _x_ until _t_ = 5 s, when it reverses direction. We know this from looking at the velocity function, which becomes zero at this time and negative thereafter. We also know this because the acceleration is negative and constant—meaning, the particle is decelerating, or accelerating in the negative direction. The particle’s position reaches 25 m, where it then reverses direction and begins to accelerate in the negative _x_ direction. The position reaches zero at _t_ = 10 s.

![An x y z coordinate system is shown. All the axes show distance in meters and run from -50 to 50 meters. A series of 10 red dots are shown, with the sixth dot is labeled as t = 6 s and the tenth as t = 10 s. The red series of dots starts at the origin and curves upward \(both y and z increasing with time\). Vertical dashed lines connect the red dots to a series of blue dots in the x y plane. The blue dots are all in the first quadrant \(positive x and y\). The dots are regularly spaced along the y coordinate, while the x coordinate starts at 0, increases, reaches a maximum of x = 25 m at t = 5, and then decreases back to x = 0 at t 10 s.][1] Figure 4.9 The particle starts at point (_x_, _y_, _z_) = (0, 0, 0) with position vector →r=0. The projection of the trajectory onto the _xy-_plane is shown. The values of _y_ and _z_ increase linearly as a function of time, whereas _x_ has a turning point at _t_ = 5 s and 25 m, when it reverses direction. At this point, the _x_ component of the velocity becomes negative. At _t_ = 10 s, the particle is back to 0 m in the _x_ direction. 

Significance By graphing the trajectory of the particle, we can better understand its motion, given by the numerical results of the kinematic equations.

Check Your Understanding 4.2 

Suppose the acceleration function has the form →a(t)=aˆi+bˆj+cˆkm/s2, where _a, b,_ and _c_ are constants. What can be said about the functional form of the velocity function?

### Constant Acceleration

Multidimensional motion with constant acceleration can be treated the same way as shown in the previous chapter for one-dimensional motion. Earlier we showed that three-dimensional motion is equivalent to three one-dimensional motions, each along an axis perpendicular to the others. To develop the relevant equations in each direction, let’s consider the two-dimensional problem of a particle moving in the _xy_ plane with constant acceleration, ignoring the _z_-component for the moment. The acceleration vector is

→a=a0xˆi+a0yˆj.

Each component of the motion has a separate set of equations similar to [Equation 3.10][2]–[Equation 3.14][3] of the previous chapter on one-dimensional motion. We show only the equations for position and velocity in the _x_\- and _y_-directions. A similar set of kinematic equations could be written for motion in the _z_-direction:

x(t)=x0+(vx)avgt(4.11) vx(t)=v0x+axt(4.12) x(t)=x0+v0xt+12axt2(4.13) v2x(t)=v20x+2ax(x−x0)(4.14) y(t)=y0+(vy)avgt(4.15) vy(t)=v0y+ayt(4.16) y(t)=y0+v0yt+12ayt2(4.17) v2y(t)=v20y+2ay(y−y0).(4.18) 

Here the subscript 0 denotes the initial position or velocity. Equation 4.11 to Equation 4.18 can be substituted into [Equation 4.2][4] and [Equation 4.5][5] without the _z_-component to obtain the position vector and velocity vector as a function of time in two dimensions:

→r(t)=x(t)ˆi+y(t)ˆjand→v(t)=vx(t)ˆi+vy(t)ˆj.

The following example illustrates a practical use of the kinematic equations in two dimensions.

### Example 4.6 

A Skier Figure 4.10 shows a skier moving with an acceleration of 2.1m/s2 down a slope of 15° at _t_ = 0. With the origin of the coordinate system at the front of the lodge, her initial position and velocity are

→r(0)=(75.0ˆi−50.0ˆj)m

and

→v(0)=(4.1ˆi−1.1ˆj)m/s.

(a) What are the _x-_ and _y_-components of the skier’s position and velocity as functions of time? (b) What are her position and velocity at _t_ = 10.0 s?

![An illustration of a skier in an x y coordinate system is shown. The skier is moving along a line that is 15 degrees below the horizontal x direction and has an acceleration of a = 2.1 meters per second squared also directed in his direction of motion. The acceleration is represented as a purple arrow.][6] Figure 4.10 A skier has an acceleration of 2.1m/s2 down a slope of 15°. The origin of the coordinate system is at the ski lodge. 

Strategy Since we are evaluating the components of the motion equations in the _x_ and _y_ directions, we need to find the components of the acceleration and put them into the kinematic equations. The components of the acceleration are found by referring to the coordinate system in Figure 4.10. Then, by inserting the components of the initial position and velocity into the motion equations, we can solve for her position and velocity at a later time _t_.

Solution (a) The origin of the coordinate system is at the top of the hill with _y-_axis vertically upward and the _x-_axis horizontal. By looking at the trajectory of the skier, the _x-_component of the acceleration is positive and the _y-_component is negative. Since the angle is 15° down the slope, we find

ax=(2.1m/s2)cos(15°)=2.0m/s2 ay=(−2.1m/s2)sin15°=−0.54m/s2.

Inserting the initial position and velocity into Equation 4.12 and Equation 4.13 for _x_, we have

x(t)=75.0m+(4.1m/s)t+12(2.0m/s2)t2 vx(t)=4.1m/s+(2.0m/s2)t.

For _y_, we have

y(t)=−50.0m+(−1.1m/s)t+12(−0.54m/s2)t2 vy(t)=−1.1m/s+(−0.54m/s2)t.

(b) Now that we have the equations of motion for _x_ and _y_ as functions of time, we can evaluate them at _t_ = 10.0 s:

x(10.0s)=75.0m+(4.1m/s2)(10.0s)+12(2.0m/s2)(10.0s)2=216.0m vx(10.0s)=4.1m/s+(2.0m/s2)(10.0s)=24.1m/s y(10.0s)=−50.0m+(−1.1m/s)(10.0s)+12(−0.54m/s2)(10.0s)2=−88.0m vy(10.0s)=−1.1m/s+(−0.54m/s2)(10.0s)=−6.5m/s.

The position and velocity at _t_ = 10.0 s are, finally,

→r(10.0s)=(216.0ˆi−88.0ˆj)m →v(10.0s)=(24.1ˆi−6.5ˆj)m/s.

The magnitude of the velocity of the skier at 10.0 s is 25 m/s, which is 60 mi/h.

Significance It is useful to know that, given the initial conditions of position, velocity, and acceleration of an object, we can find the position, velocity, and acceleration at any later time.

With Equation 4.8 through Equation 4.10 we have completed the set of expressions for the position, velocity, and acceleration of an object moving in two or three dimensions. If the trajectories of the objects look something like the “Red Arrows” in the opening picture for the chapter, then the expressions for the position, velocity, and acceleration can be quite complicated. In the sections to follow we examine two special cases of motion in two and three dimensions by looking at projectile motion and circular motion.

### Interactive

At this [University of Colorado Boulder website][7], you can explore the position velocity and acceleration of a ladybug with an interactive simulation that allows you to change these parameters.

   [1]: https://cnx.org/resources/95b4c2c25c2c3e9fb5b2a57b94c94909f5eb6778
   [2]: /contents/d50f6e32-0fda-46ef-a362-9bd36ca7c97d@11.28:d8133443-59e9-41e8-a628-d3fb8cb1f305@13#fs-id1168326903625
   [3]: /contents/d50f6e32-0fda-46ef-a362-9bd36ca7c97d@11.28:d8133443-59e9-41e8-a628-d3fb8cb1f305@13#fs-id1168326834410
   [4]: /contents/d50f6e32-0fda-46ef-a362-9bd36ca7c97d@11.28:dc780e98-2287-4fa4-bfe0-d7a67497128a@8#fs-id1165037862253
   [5]: /contents/d50f6e32-0fda-46ef-a362-9bd36ca7c97d@11.28:dc780e98-2287-4fa4-bfe0-d7a67497128a@8#fs-id1165037862045
   [6]: https://cnx.org/resources/7f4e56f07c561c08b1c8dd695347df4eacbd36aa
   [7]: https://openstax.org/l/21phetmotladyb

